autobiography. I made the start, but scarcely had I turned over the first sheet when riots broke out
in Bombay and the work remained at a standstill. Then followed a series of events which
culminated in my imprisonment at Yeravda. Sjt. Jeramdas, who was one of my fellow-prisoners
there, asked me to put everything else on one side and finish writing the autobiography. I replied
that I had already framed a programme of study for myself, and that I could not think of doing
anything else until this course was complete. I should indeed have finished the autobiography
had I gone through my full term of imprisonment at Yeravda, for there was still a year left to
complete the task, when I was discharged. Swami Anand has now repeated the proposal, and as
I have finished the history of Satyagraha in South Africa, I am tempted to undertake the
autobiography forNavajivan. The Swami wanted me to write it separately for publication as a
book. But I have no spare time. I could only write a chapter week by week. Something has to be
written for Navajivan every week. Why should it not be the autobiography? The Swami agreed to
the proposal, and here am I hard at work.
 But a God-fearing friend had his doubts, which he shared with me on my day of silence. 'What
has set you on this adventure? he asked. 'Writing an autobiography is a practice peculiar to the
west. I know of nobody in the East having written one, except amongst those who have come
under Western influence. And what will you write? Supposing you reject tomorrow the things you
hold as principles today, or supposing you revise in the future your plans of today, is it not likely
that the men who shape their conduct on the authority of your word, spoken or written, may be
misled. Don't you think it would be better not to write anything like an autobiography, at any rate
just yet?'
 This argument had some effect on me. But it is not my purpose to attempt a real
autobiography. I simply want to tell the story of my numerous experiments with truth, and as my
life consists of nothing but those experiments, it is true that the story will take the shape of an
autobiography. But I shall not mind, if every page of it speaks only of my experiments. I believe,
or at any rate flatter myself with the belief, that a connected account of all these experiments will
not be without benefit to the reader. My experiments in the political field are now known, not only
in India, but to a certain extent to the 'civilized' world. For me, they have not much value; and the
title of Mahatma that they have won for me has, therefore, even less. Often the title has deeply
pained me; and there is not a moment I can recall when it may be said to have tickled me. But I
should certainly like to narrate my experiments in the spiritual field which are known only to
myself, and from which I have derived such power as I posses for working in the political field. If
the experiments are really spiritual, then there can be no room for self-praise. They can only add
to my humility. The more I reflect and look back on the past, the more vividly do I feel my
limitations.
 What I want to achieve,—what I have been striving and pining to achieve these thirty years—is
self-realization, to see God face to face, to attain Moksha./1/ I live and move and have my being
in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of speaking and writing, and all my ventures in the
political field, are directed to this same end. But as I have all along believed that what is possible
for one is possible for all, my experiments have not been conducted in the closet, but in the open;
and I do not think that this fact detracts from their spiritual value. There are some things which are
known only to oneself and one's Maker. These are clearly incommunicable. The experiments I
am about to relate are not such. But they are spiritual or rather moral; for the essence of religion
is morality.
 Only those matters of religion that can be comprehended as much by children as by older
people, will be included in this story. If I can narrate them in a dispassionate and humble spirit,
3
many other experimenters will find in them provision for their onward march. Far be it from me to
claim any degree of perfection for these experiments. I claim for them nothing more than does a
scientist who, though he conducts his experiments with the utmost accuracy, forethought and
minuteness, never claims any finality about his conclusions, but keeps an open mind regarding
them. I have gone through deep self-introspection, searched myself through and through, and
examined and analysed every psychological situation. Yet I am far from claiming any finality or
infallibility about my conclusions. One claim I do indeed make and it is this. For me they appear to
be absolutely correct, and seem for the time being to be final. For if they were not, I should base
no action on them. But at every step I have carried out the process of acceptance or rejection and
acted accordingly. And so long as my acts satisfy my reason and my heart, I must firmly adhere
to my original conclusions.
 If I had only to discuss academic principles. I should clearly not attempt an autobiography. But
my purpose being to give an account of various practical applications of these principles, I have
given the chapters I propose to write the title of The Story of My Experiments with Truth. These
will of course include experiments with non-violence, celibacy and other principles of conduct
believed to be distinct from truth. But for me, truth is the sovereign principle, which includes
numerous other principles. This truth is not only truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in thought
also, and not only the relative truth of our conception, but the Absolute Truth, the Eternal
Principle, that is God. There are innumerable definitions of God, because His manifestations are
innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun me. But I worship
God as Truth only. I have not yet found Him, but I am seeking after Him. I am prepared to
sacrifice the things dearest to me in pursuit of this quest. Even if the sacrifice demanded be my
very life, I hope I may be prepared to give it. But as long as I have not realized this Absolute
Truth, so long must I hold by the relative truth as I have conceived it. That relative truth must,
meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckler. Though this path is strait and narrow and
sharp as the razor's edge, for me it has been the quickest and easiest. Even my Himalayan
blunders have seemed trifling to me because I have kept strictly to this path. For the path has
saved me from coming to grief, and I have gone forward according to my light. Often in my
progress I have had faint glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is growing
upon me that He alone is real and all else is unreal. Let those who wish, realize how the
conviction has grown upon me; let them share my experiments and share also my conviction if
they can. The further conviction has been growing upon me that whatever is possible for me is
possible even for a child, and I have sound reasons for saying so. The instruments for the quest
of truth are as simple as they are difficult. They may appear quite impossible to an arrogant
person, and quite possible to an innocent child. The seeker after truth should be humbler than the
dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should so humble
himself that even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not till then, will he have a glimpse of
truth. The dialogue between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra makes this abundantly clear. Christianity
and Islam also amply bear it out.
 If anything that I write in these pages should strike the reader as being touched with pride, then
he must take it that there is something wrong with my quest, and that my glimpses are no more
than a mirage. Let hundreds like me perish, but let truth prevail. Let us not reduce the standards
of truth even by a hair's breadth for judging erring mortals like myself.
 I hope and pray that no one will regard the advice interspersed in the following chapters as
authoritative. The experiments narrated should be regarded as illustrations, in the light of which
everyone may carry on his own experiments according to his own inclination and capacity. I trust
that to this limited extent the illustrations will be really helpful; because I am not going either to
conceal or understate any ugly things that must be told. I hope to acquaint the reader fully with all
my faults and errors. My purpose is to describe experiments in the science of Satyagraha, not to
say how good I am. In judging myself I shall try to be as harsh as truth, as I want others also to
be. Measuring myself by that standard I must exclaim with Surdas :
4
Where is there a wretch
So wicked and loathsome as I?
I have forsaken my Maker,
So faithless have I been.
For it is an unbroken torture to me that I am still so far from Him, who, as I fully know, governs
every breath of my life, and whose offspring I am. I know that it is the evil passions within that
keep me so far from Him, and yet I cannot get away from them.
 But I must close. I can only take up the actual story in the neree generations, from my grandfather, they have been Prime Ministers in several Kathiawad
States. Uttamchand Gandhi, alias Ota Gandhi, my grandfather, must have been a man of
principle. State intrigues compelled him to leave Porbandar, where he was Diwan, and to seek
refuge in Junagadh. There he saluted the Nawab with the left hand. Someone, noticing the
apparent discourtesy, asked for an explanation, which was thus given: 'The right hand is already
pledged to Porbandar.'
 Ota Gandhi married a second time, having lost his first wife. He had four sons by his first wife
and two by his second wife. I do not think that in my childhood I ever felt or knew that these sons
of Ota Gandhi were not all of the same mother. The fifth of these six brothers was Karamchand
Gandhi, alias Kaba Gandhi, and the sixth was Tulsidas Gandhi. Both these brothers were Prime
Ministers in Porbandar, one after the other. Kaba Gandhi was my father. He was a member of the
Rajasthanik Court. It is now extinct, but in those days it was a very influential body for settling
disputes between the chiefs and their fellow clansmen. He was for some time Prime Minister in
Rajkot and then in Vankaner. He was a pensioner of the Rajkot State when he died.
 Kaba Gandhi married four times in succession, having lost his wife each time by death. He had
two daughters by his first and second marriages. His last wife, Putlibai, bore him a daughter and
three sons, I being the youngest.
 My father was a lover of his clan, truthful, brave and generous, but short-tempered. To a
certain extent he might have been even given to carnal pleasures. For he married for the fourth
time when he was over forty. But he was incorruptible, and had earned a name for strict
impartiality in his family as well as outside. His loyalty to the state was well known. An Assistant
Political Agent spoke insultingly of the Rajkot Thakore Saheb, his chief, and he stood up
[=objected] to the insult. The Agent was angry and asked Kaba Gandhi to apologize. This he
refused to do and was therefore kept under detention for a few hours. But when the Agent saw
that Kaba Gandhi was adamant, he ordered him to be released.
 My father never had any ambition to accumulate riches, and left us very little property.
 He had no education, save that of experience. At best, he might be said to have read up to the
fifth Gujarati standard. Of history and geography he was innocent. But his rich experience of
practical affairs stood him in good stead in the solution of the most intricate questions and in
managing hundreds of men. Of religious training he had very little, but he had that kind of
religious culture which frequent visits to temples and listening to religious discourses make
available to many Hindus. In his last days he began reading the Gita at the instance of a learned
Brahman friend of the family, and he used to repeat aloud some verses every day at the time of
worship.
 The outstanding impression my mother has left on my memory is that of saintliness. She was
deeply religious. She would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers. Going
to Haveli--the Vaishnava temple--was one of her daily duties. As far as my memory can go back, I
do not remember her having ever missed the Chaturmas./1/ She would take the hardest vows
and keep them without flinching. Illness was no excuse for relaxing them. I can recall her once
falling ill when she was observing the Chandrayana/2/ vow, but the illness was not allowed to
6
interrupt the observance. To keep two or three consecutive fasts was nothing to her. Living on
one meal a day during Chaturmas was a habit with her. Not content with that, she fasted every
alternate day during one Chaturmas. During another Chaturmas she vowed not to have food
without seeing the sun. We children on those days would stand, staring at the sky, waiting to
announce the appearance of the sun to our mother. Everyone knows that at the height of the
rainy season the sun often does not condescend to show his face. And I remember days when, at
his sudden appearance, we would rush and announce it to her. She would run out to see with her
own eyes, but by that time the fugitive sun would be gone, thus depriving her of her meal. 'That
does not matter,' she would say cheerfully, 'God did not want me to eat today.' And then she
would return to her round of duties.
 My mother had strong commonsense. She was well informed about all matters of state, and
ladies of the court thought highly of her intelligence. Often I would accompany her, exercising the
privilege of childhood, and I still remember many lively discussions she had with the widowed
mother of the Thakor Saheb.
 Of these parents I was born at Porbandar, otherwise known as Sundampuri, on the 2nd
October, 1869. I passed my childhood in Porbandar. I recollect having been put to school. It was
with some difficulty that I got through the multiplication tables. The fact that I recollect nothing
more of those days than having learnt, in company with other boys, to call our teacher all kinds of
names, would strougly suggest that my intellect must have been sluggish, and my 
 I must have been about seven when my father left Porbandar for Rajkot, to become a member
of the Rajasthanik Court. There I was put into a primary school, and I can well recollect those
days, including the names and other particulars of the teachers who taught me. As at Porbandar,
so here, there is hardly anything to note about my studies. I could have been only a mediocre
student. From this school I went to the suburban school and thence to the high school, having
already reached my twelfth year. I do not remember having ever told a lie, during this short
period, either to my teachers or to my schoolmates. I used to be very shy and avoided all
company. My books and my lessons were my sole companions. To be at school at that stroke of
the hour and to run back home as soon as school closed--that was my daily habit. I literally ran
back, because I could not bear to talk to anybody. I was even afraid lest anyone should poke fun
at me.
 There is an incident which occured at the examination during my first year at the high school,
and which is worth recording. Mr. Giles, the Educational Inspector, had come on a visit of
inspection. He had set us five words to write as a spelling exercise. One of the words was 'kettle'.
I had mis-spelt it. The teacher tried to prompt me with the point of his boot, but I would not be
prompted. It was beyond me to see that he wanted me to copy the spelling from my neighbour's
slate, for I had thought that the teacher was there to supervise us against copying. The result that
all the boys except myself were found to have spelt every word correctly. Only I had been stupid.
The teacher tried later to bring this stupidity home to me, but without effect. I never could learn
the art of 'copying'.
 Yet the incident did not in the least diminish my respect for my teacher. I was, by nature, blind
to the faults of elders. Later I came to know many other failings of this teacher, but my regard for
him remained the same. For I had learnt to carry out the orders of elders, not to scan their
actions.
 Two other incidents belonging to the same period have always clung to my memory. As a rule I
had a distaste for any reading beyond my school books. The daily lessons had to be done,
because I disliked being taken to task by my teacher as much as I disliked deceiving him.
Therefore I would do the lessons, but often without my mind in them. Thus when even the
lessons could not be done properly, there was of course no question of any extra reading. But
somehow my eyes fell on a book purchased by my father. It was Shravana Pitribhakti Nataka (a
play about Shravana's devotion to this parents). I read it with intense interest. There came to our
place about the same time [some] itinerant showmen. One of the pictures I was shown was of
Shravana carrying, by means of slings fitted for his shoulders, his blind parents on a pilgrimage.
The book and the picture left an indelible impression on my mind. 'Here is an example for you to
copy,' I said to myself. The agonized lament of the parents over Shravana's death is still fresh in
my memory. The melting tune moved me deeply, and I played it on a concertina which my father
had purchased for me.
 There was a similar incident connected with another play. Just about this time, I had secured
my father's permission to see a play performed by a certain dramatic company. This play--
Harishchandra--captured my heart. I could never be tired of seeing it. But how often should I be
permitted to go? It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without
number. 'Why should not all be truthful like Harishchandra?' was the question I asked myself day
and night. To follow truth and to go through all the ordeals Harishchandra went through was the
one ideal it inspired in me. I literally believed in the story of Harishchandra. The thought of it all
often made me weep. My commonsense tells me today that Harishchandra could not have been
a historical character. Still both Harishchandra and Shravana are living realities for me, and I am
sure I should be moved as before if I were to read those plays again today.
8
III. CHILD MARRIAGE

 Much as I wish that I had not to write this chapter, I know that I shall have to swallow many
such bitter draughts in the course of this narrative. And I cannot do otherwise, if I claim to be a
worshipper of Truth It is my painful duty to have to record here my marriage at the age of thirteen.
As I see the youngsters of the same age about me who are under my care, and think of my own
marriage, I am inclined to pity myself and to congratulate them on having escaped my lot. I can
see no moral argument in support of such a preposterously early marriage.
 Let the reader make no mistake. I was married, not betrothed. For in Kathiwad there are two
distinct rites--betrothal and marriage. Betrothal is a preliminary promise on the part of the parents
of the boy and the girl to join them in marriage, and it is not inviolable. The death of the boy
entails no widowhood on the girl. It is an agreement purely between the parents, and the children
have no concern with it. Often they are not even informed of it. It appears that I was betrothed
thrice, though without my knowledge. I was told that two girls chosen for me had died in turn, and
therefore I infer that I was betrothed three times. I have a faint recollection, however, that the third
betrothal took place in my seventh year. But I do not recollect having been informed about it. In
the present chapter I am talking about my marriage, of which I have the clearest recollection.
 It will be remembered that we were three brothers. The first was already married. The elders
decided to marry my second brother, who was two or three years my senior; a cousin, possibly a
year older; and me, all at the same time. In doing so there was no thought of our welfare, much
less of our wishes. It was purely a question of their convenience and economy.
 Marriage among Hindus is no simple matter. The parents of the bride and the bridegroom often
bring themselves to ruin over it. They waste their substance, they waste their time. Months are
taken up over the preparations--in making clothes and ornaments and in preparing budgets for
dinners. Each tries to outdo the other in the number and variety of courses to be prepared.
Women, whether they have a voice or no, sing themselves hoarse, even get ill, and disturb the
peace of their neighbours. These in their turn quietly put up with all the turmoil and bustle, all the
dirt and filth, representing the remains of the feasts, because they know that a time will come
when they also will be behaving in the same manner.
 It would be better, thought my elders, to have all this bother over at one and the same time.
Less expense and greater eclat. For money could be freely spent if it had only to be spent once
instead of thrice. My father and my uncle were both old, and we were the last children they had to
marry. It is likely that they wanted to have the last best time of their lives. In view of all these
considcrations, a triple wedding was decided upon, and as I have said before, months were taken
up in preparation for it.
 It was only through these preparations that we got warning of the coming event. I do not think it
meant to me anything more than the prospect of good clothes to wear, drum beating, marriage
processions, rich dinners, and a strange girl to play with. The carnal desire came later. I propose
to draw the curtain over my shame, except for a few details worth recording. To these I shall
come later. But even they have little to do with the central idea I have kept before me in writing
this story.
 So my brother and I were both taken to Porbandar from Rajkot. There are some amusing
details of the preliminaries to the final drama--e. My father was a Diwan, but nevertheless a servant, and all the more so because he was in
favor with the Thakore Saheb. The latter would not let him go until the last moment. And when he
did so, he ordered for my father special stage coaches, reducing the journey by two days. But the
fates had willed otherwise. Porbandar is 120 miles from Rajkot--a cart journey of five days. My
father did the distance in three, but the coach toppled over in the third stage, and he sustained
severe injuries. He arrived bandaged all over. Both his and our interest in the coming event was
half destroyed, but the ceremonies had to be gone through. For how could the marriage dates be
changed? However, I forgot my grief over my father's injuries in the childish amusement of the
wedding.
 I was devoted to my parents. But no less was I devoted to the passions that flesh is heir to. I
had yet to learn that all happiness and pleasure should be sacrificed in devoted service to my
parents. And yet, as though by way of punishment for my desire for pleasure, an incident
happened which has ever since rankled in my mind, and which I will relate later. Nishkulanand
sings: 'Renunciation of objects, without the renunciation of desires, is short-lived, however hard
you may try.' Whenever I sing this song or hear it sung, this bitter untoward incident rushes to my
memory and fills me with shame.
 My father put on a brave face in spite of his injures, and took full part in the wedding. As I think
of it, I can even today call before my mind's eye the place where he sat as he went through the
different details of the ceremony. Little did I dream then that one day I should severely criticize my
father for having married me as a child. Everything on that day seemed to me right and proper
and pleasing. There was also my own eagerness to get married. And as everything that my father
did then struck me as beyond reproach, the recollection of those things is fresh in my memory. I
can picture to myself, even today, how we sat on our wedding dais, how we performed
the Saptapadi,/1/ how we, the newly wedded husband and wife, put the sweet Kansar/2/ into
each other's mouth, and how we began to live together. And oh! that first night. Two innocent
children all unwittingly hurled themselves into the ocean of life. My brother's wife had thoroughly
coached me about my behaviour on the first night. I do not know who had coached my wife. I
have never asked her about it, nor am I inclined to do so now. The reader may be sure that we
were too nervous to face each other. We were certainly too shy. How was I to talk to her, and
what was I to say? The coaching could not carry me far. But no coaching is really necessary in
such matters. The impressions of the former birth are potent enough to make all coaching
superfluous. We gradually began to know each other, and to speak freely together. We were the
same age. But I took no time in assuming the authority of a husband.
/1/ 'Saptapdi' are seven steps a Hindu bridge and bridegroom walk together, making at the same time
promises of mutual fidelity and devotion, after which the marriage becomes irrevocable.
/2/ 'Kansar' is a preparation of wheat which the pair partake of together after the completion of the
ceremony.

10
IV. PLAYING THE HUSBAND

 About the time of my marriage, little pamphlets costing a pice, or a pie (I now forget how
much), used to be issued, in which conjugal love, thrift, child marriages, and other such subjects
were discussed. Whenever I came across any of these, I used to go through them from cover to
cover, and it was a habit with me to forget what I did not like, and to carry out in practice whatever
I liked. Lifelong faithfulness to the wife, inculcated in these booklets as the duty of the husband,
remained permanently imprinted on my heart. Furthermore, the passion for truth was innate in
me, and to be false to her was therefore out of the question. And then there was very little chance
of my being faithless at that tender age.
 But the lesson of faithfulness had also an untoward effect. 'If I should be pledged to be faithful
to my wife, she also should be pledged to be faithful to me,' I said to myself. The thought made
me a jealous husband. Her duty was easily converted into my right to exact faithfulness from her,
and if it had to be exacted, I should be watchfully tenacious of the right. I had absolutely no
reason to suspect my wife's fidelity, but jealousy does not wait for reasons. I must needs be
forever on the look-out regarding her movements, and therefore she could not go anywhere
without my permission. This sowed the seeds of a bitter quarrel between us. The restraint was
virtually a sort of imprisonment. And Kasturbai was not the girl to brook any such thing. She made
it a point to go out whenever and wherever she liked. More restraint on my part resulted in more
liberty being taken by her, and in my getting more and more cross. Refusal to speak to one
another thus became the order of the day with us, married children. I think it was quite innocent of
Kasturbai to have taken those liberties with my restrictions. How could a guileless girl brook any
restraint on going to the temple or on going on visits to friends? If I had the right to impose
restrictions on her, had not she also a similar right? All this is clear to me today. But at that time I
had to make good my authority as a husband!
 Let not the reader think, however, that ours was a life of unrelieved bitterness. For my
severities were all based on love. I wanted to make my wife an ideal wife. My ambition was
to make her live a pure life, learn what I learnt, and identify her life and thought with mine.
 I do not know whether Kasturbai had any such ambition. She was illiterate. By nature she was
simple, independent, persevering, and, with me at least, reticent. She was not impatient of her
ignorance, and I do not recollect my studies having ever spurred her to go in for a similar
adventure. I fancy, therefore, that my ambition was all one-sided. My passion was entirely centred
on one woman, and I wanted it to be reciprocated. But even if there were no reciprocity, it could
not be all unrelieved misery because there was active love on one side at least.
 I must say I was passionately fond of her. Even at school I used to think of her, and the thought
of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me. Separation was unbearable. I
used to keep her awake till late in the night with my idle talk. If with this devouring passion there
had not been in me a burning attachment to duty, I should either have fallen a prey to disease
and premature death, or have sunk into a burdensome existence. But the appointed tasks had to
be gone through every morning, and lying to anyone was out of the question. It was this last thing
that saved me from many a pitfall.
 I have already said that Kasturbai was illiterate. I was very anxious to teach her, but lustful love 